greetings everyone lhasa montgomery here
with another nice vintage episode from
days gone by sorry about the gap in the
action i know this one's a little late i
hope you don't mind too much thanks for
listening to the china vintage hour
we're back with more sven Hadean it's
the year 1895 20 years into the sad and
frustrating reign of the Guangxu Emperor
while Sven Hadean is busy exploring the
unknown areas in and around Southwest
shinjang on the other side of the
country China is being picked apart and
divided up amongst the great foreign
powers of the day that now included
Japan 1895 always a year in Chinese
history that lives and infamy but way
way out west you'd hardly know what was
going on in Beijing it was a whole
different world out there Xin Jiang or
Chinese Turkestan as it was referred to
was a huge expanse of territory for the
most part still unexplored the Silk
Roads that had been passing through
these parts since the early Han Dynasty
always stuck to the well-worn beaten
pass beyond the roads traversed by
thousands and thousands of caravans were
regions where no man had yet gone
certainly no European man I should say
or woman yet and sven Hadean was
jonesing to have a go at uncovering some
of the mysteries that lay between
kashgar and the west of xin zhang all
the way to the coton River 500 miles to
the east today that's maybe an
eight-hour drive on the g3 15 i way back
and spends time 1895 the only way to
traverse that distance was on the back
of a camel we're going to read some more
passages from volume 1 of his book
through asia
and this time we'll hear about Sven's
ill-fated trip across the Taklamakan
desert not a terribly hospitable place
but people have been living there since
prehistoric times the desert was rimmed
by natural obstacles
the chen shan mountain range was to the
north the gobi desert to the east the
Pamir mountains to the north and west
and the Kunlun mountains to the south
the total area of this desert was about
130 thousand square miles bigger than
the whole state of new mexico to give
you an idea back in the day China used
to test their nuclear bombs and the
Tarim Basin at lap nor so remote and
desolate was the Taklamakan desert the
Silk Roads skirted the northern and
southern rims of the desert and a number
of familiar Oasis towns had popped up
along the route like Kashgar coton
Yarkon Turpin and Doon Wong to name a
few in this episode we're gonna follow
van Hadean as he prepares to cross a
stretch of this desert I wasn't sure if
I was gonna read this passage because
it's rather gruesome
well not the portion being presented
today the probably next episode right
now will get about a week into his
journey before we hit the end of
stoppage time so we'll get a bit more
than a quarter of the way into this
ill-fated expedition there are a whole
slew of place names and various Weger
care Gea's and Kazak terms used hair and
their like like our buzz is a kind of a
cart drawn by bullocks and the term
Darya
you'll hear a lot it means river the
Yarkon Darya the Yarkon River which runs
north and south across the westernmost
part of Xinjiang and the Taklamakan
desert you'll also hear about the Dolan
people that dolla angered oil on people
there in ancient people who over the
centuries got assimilated in with the
weekers care gi's and Kazakhs they have
a unique culture that differentiates
them a little
in any case don't look for them on the
list of ethnic groups in China they're
not on it but the Dolans are in our
story today so just wanted to make you
aware of them a bag and it's a sort of a
village head man or elder the guy in
charge and you'll hear the term Tenga
and
was a unit of local currency you'll also
hear references to Mazar tog this is the
tallest mountain in that region also the
name of a fort and Muslim shrine the
ruins still exist there's a lot of
weaker words that I'm not terribly sure
how to pronounce but I'm gonna give it
my best try so let's turn back the pages
of time to 1895 122 years ago from this
2017 vantage point not ancient history
but compared to us in our age of
technological wonders and conveniences
it sure seems like it you know even
today with all the gadgets and whatnot
that we have at our disposal crossing
the Taklamakan desert by camel there's a
risky and dangerous thing to do I mean
you have the g3 14 highway that runs
through part of it but trying to cross
it was always a challenge and still is
today if you try it
Savannah Hadean style and as we open
chapter 38 its March 1895 and spends as
frustrated as hell about how long it's
taken to get his expedition on the road
every day delay brings him one day
closer to summer not high season for
crossing the Taklamakan or any desert
he's trying to secure camels and it's
taken forever in April he'll set out
from the relative safety and comfort of
Kashgar for the coton River I hope you
enjoy this story on the threshold of the
desert March 15th this day marked the
beginning of a long period of waiting
extremely trying to my patience day
after day went by but no camels arrived
I would gladly pass over these 25 days
altogether but find in my notebook
certain incidents and facts that are not
without interest I made it my business
to gather all the information I could
about the desert that stretched to the
east for instance today I heard a two
men who a few years ago started from the
village of Yan Tok on the right bank of
the ark and area taken with them
provisions
for 12 days after three days they
reached a disused riverbed deep in stony
with a wooden bridge across it but so
dilapidated that it would not bear them
to walk on it they thought at first of
following up the course of the river but
as they found no water in that direction
they retraced their steps and went
downstream and they're discovered
quantities of nephrite or Jade after
another seven days they reached the
mountain of Massage Hogg where they
found commish and obtained water by
digging today Aslam bhai returned from
Yarkon bringing with him for iron tanks
for water six goatskins sesame oil and
seed husks for the camels petroleum
bread toasted flour macaroni honey sax
spades whips bridle bits bowls cups and
other requisites on March 19th
we moved over to the large village of
Marquette on the right bank of the arcon
Darya whence the caravan was to make it
start for the desert in the morning a
number of the inhabitants of America
came to escort us to their village the
beg Muhammad Nia's beg arrived with a
present of chickens eggs and light
refreshments he was a tall man with a
thin white beard and looked energetic
and severe transport horses were
employed to carry over our baggage and
after thee on boshy of lilac and his
pretty wife who had both been very kind
and hospitable during my stay in their
house had been well rewarded with money
and cloth we marched down to the ferry
which conveyed us and our large Caravan
across in four trips the ice had
evidently ceased to melt farther to the
south for the river had fallen 11 inches
since March 8th and from this time
onwards it would continue to sink until
the summer floods came down from the
mountains after a quarter of an hour's
ride in a southeasterly direction we
passed the village of on get lake at the
end of an hour we reached the village of
chum garlic and after another
three-quarters of an hour were in
Marquette the bag placed his own house
of my disposal and I was soon installed
in a large and pleasant room
covered with carpets and with niches in
the walls strange to say meerkat has
never been visited by any European one
man told me that along with some
companions he had travelled for 20 days
on foot through the desert carrying with
them supplies of food and water on
donkeys after going seven days east
northeast by the side of gigantic sand
dunes they reached a long straggling
Mountain my informant besides many
others was in the habit of going out
every year into the desert to look for
gold but as yet had found nothing they
called the desert Taklamakan and the
general consensus of opinion was that
given strong camels we ought to be able
to cross right over it to the coton
Daria in the evening I held a levy Nia's
bag and the on Bashi of an get leak taco
dia each presented me with a sheep while
the Hindus gave me a goodly supply of
potatoes and butter both exceedingly
welcome afterwards we were entertained
for a long time with the music of a
zipper and a small harp which played in
a slow time sounding very well all
together although the music was rather
melancholy March 20th toque de ho dia
was a thorough gentleman he often came
to see me and would sit talking in my
room by the hour together when I began
to grow impatient at receiving no news
of the camels
he always exhorted me to patients saying
with unruffled composure and with a
conviction that allowed of no demurrer
Khiladi hey laddie
they will come they will come but
nothing was heard of them and precious
time was being wasted I thought that we
were heaping glowing coals on our heads
for spring was upon us and during the
hot season of the year the desert is
simply a furnace meanwhile togue de ho
dia gave me much valuable information
today for example he told me the
inhabitants of marrakech are Dolan's and
that in their own opinion there and no
wise different from the people of
kashgar they possess a few slight
dialectical dip
of speech that is all but tog de ho dia
himself considered them very different
from their neighbors their natures were
hard and cold and they were so
unforgiving that trifling disputes would
linger on for years the observances of
Islam were jealously kept at marquette
on the last bizarre day in the middle of
the fast a man ate before the Sun set he
was immediately seized flogged and with
his hands tied behind his back was led
in a rope through the bazaar from every
corner of which the following questions
and answers were recode as the offender
passed did you eat yes did you mean to
do it again never it is also customary
to blacken the culprits face before he
makes his penitential promenade through
the bazaar a March 21st I visited the
bazaar it was very spacious and every
trade and calling had a special Ally
allotted to it nevertheless there was no
trading done except once a week namely
on the bazaar day when stalls and wares
are brought out of the houses and
arranged on platforms built in front of
them at the time of my visit there were
a number of women sitting on the
platform sewing the women were always
unveiled generally bareheaded and wore
their thick black hair in two long
plaits a particularly popular occupation
with them seemed to be the extermination
of certain undesirable parasites and it
was by no means a rare thing to see one
woman with her head resting in her
neighbor's lap at last on March 22nd
Mohammad Jakob came back from kashgar
bringing a bulky mail bag but no camels
I was thus left precisely where I had
been at the beginning of the month now I
fell back upon my excellent Islam by and
on the next day sent him off to Yarkon
post haste with peremptory orders not to
come back again without camels happily I
had my meteorological and astronomical
observations to say nothing of the
letters I had just received and of old
tog de cotija to help me pass the time I
did not find yo.hannes the missionary
much of a
resource he was one of those morbidly
religious people who imagined that true
Christianity is incompatible with a
sober joy in life as well as with good
spirits this was no doubt partly due to
his being a converted Muhammad in such
proselytes are often 10 times worse than
their teachers however he was
good-natured and helpful though he
always seemed to be depressed and in
dull spirits March 26th
Nia's beg administered justice at his
own house every day his usual seat was
beside one of the columns which
supported the roof of the veranda and so
long as the proceedings lasted he
assumed a very severe expression of
countenance on the platform by his side
set his mirza or secretary who entered
the proceedings in a protocol round
about him stood his men and the officers
of the law and before him the culprit
today there was a very curious case a
man had five wives v a handsome stalwart
young woman had run away to cash car
with another man the beg had given
information to the authorities there and
they found the woman and sent her back
to Marrakech where she was now to answer
for her transgressions after she had
been convicted of unfaithfulness the beg
gave her a slap on either cheek and she
began to weep the only thing she had to
say in her own defence was that life
with the other four wives was altogether
unbearable she had a knife on her person
and when the beg asked her what she was
gonna do with it she answered that she
meant to kill herself if she were
compelled to return to her husband her
punishment was that for a time she
should go and dwell with the mullahs
till she should be in a better frame of
mind and then should quietly return home
to her husband after that another young
woman was brought forward her face
bleeding and lacerated and followed by
her mother
and her husband she also had left her
husband but in this case the man had
taken the law into his own hands and had
cruelly kicked and mishandled her
several witnesses confirm the statement
that he had made use of a razor this
however the
defendant denied to make him confess the
beg gave orders for his hands to be tied
behind his back and then had him strung
up to the branch of a tree he did not
hang there long before the device
produced the desired effect the man was
taken down and 40 strokes of the rod
were administered on that part of the
body which seems to have been
providentially provided for a
castigation meanwhile he declared that
his wife had beaten him on the back
forthwith he was stripped but as no
marks were visible a second whipping was
the result in these distant regions the
sense of justice is somewhat elastic if
the accused has a well lined purse he
gets off scot-free and in any case the
bag receives certain Tenga for his
trouble if the plaintiff is not
satisfied with the verdict he can appeal
to a higher authority the nearest
Chinese Mandarin and to him the beg must
answer in his turn the Chinese
administration is a admirable one
prudent feature is that one prudent
feature in it is that they allow the
natives to retain the same system of
local self-government which they
obtained in the time of Yakko beg of
Kashgar cases of conjugal infidelity are
not on the whole uncommon nor are they
punished with particular severity as a
rule the woman has her face blacked is
placed backwards on a male ass and with
her hands tied behind her is taken
through the streets and Bazar of the
village monogamy is the rule
it is very seldom that a man has four or
five wives if a woman marries a
or a European she is considered impure
and when she dies is not interred in the
general burial ground of the place
because she had consorted with quote one
who eats swine's flesh so that her body
would pollute the graves of the faithful
with regard to column or the Dower of a
bride the customs of these people are
much the same as those of Kirin Keyes
the column is paid to the bride's
parents and varies according to the
man's circumstances and means a bi or
rich man gives as much as nine to ten
pounds each
as a general rule everything is paid in
kind but the bride's trousseau or bridal
gown is compulsory Colleen a poor man
offers merely a measure of food and
clothes the amount depends entirely upon
the demands of the parents but beauty
and physical charms are of less
importance than among the care guys if
the young couple cannot obtain the
consent of their parents it is not
unusual for them to run away they
generally come back however after a few
months and invite the old people to a
feast when all misunderstandings are
cleared up and another occasion the beg
gave judgment on two men who had been
gambling one of them had a deep gash in
his air and the whole of his face and
chest were covered with blood
he had lost seven Tenga one shilling of
sixpence and promised to procure the
money in the bazaar the winner however
demanded his winnings on the spot
whereupon the loser drew his knife and
slashed himself on the air
crying you shall have that instead of
your money the beg ordered the winner to
be publicly whipped the other man was to
be whipped as soon as his hurt was cured
the winnings
needless to say found their way into the
bags pocket the start from market Islam
and Jakob came back on the 8th of April
after a great deal of haggling and
trouble they had succeeded in getting at
Cargill eke 8 splendid male camels for a
trifle over six pounds and ten pence
apiece it had somehow got wind amongst
the inhabitants that we absolutely must
have camels for our desert journey and
in consequence they put up their prices
to double or three times what they
usually were a further difficulty arose
out of the fact that the only animals
which would serve our purpose must be
such as were accustomed to the level
plains and to traveling and desert
regions animals which were used to
moving over sand and could endure heat
and other privations these qualities
were of much more consequence than the
appearance of the beasts and their
condition of flesh during the morning we
christened the camels and measured their
girth between the humps with the view of
ascertaining how they would
comparing that respect at the end of the
journey how little we foresaw that only
one camel namely Chong Cara would
survive the journey octo yah a handsome
white camel which led the string with a
big copper bell provided with a heavy
iron tongue did get to the other side of
the desert but he died soon afterwards
from the fatigues of the March Mogra was
an exceptionally well proportioned
animal patient and good-natured I chose
him to ride upon gnar was a vicious
beast always trying to bite and kick the
moment anybody went near him bye bye the
oldest in the troop and of a grey color
was the first to succumb the other three
were young
lively things having had a long rest
they were always ready to march and took
real pleasure in being on the move they
chanced to be just molting when they
arrived every day big shaggy cuts of
their thick warm winter hair fell off so
that they had a patched shabby
appearance so long as the process of
shedding lasted each camel was provided
with a good soft pack saddle stuffed
with hay and straw the animals were
tethered in a large courtyard
immediately opposite Nia's Beggs house
and were given their fill of good hay a
luxury they enjoyed for the last time it
was very pleasant to stand and watch my
own splendid camels crouched on the
ground eagerly munching the fragrant hay
and see how their big brown eyes shone
with Placid enjoyment our two dogs Yul -
and Hamra were however of a different
opinion the former in particular could
not tolerate the camels he barked at
them till he was hoarse and was visibly
well pleased with himself when he could
get and near enough to snatch a tuft of
hair out of one or the other of them
Islam by had further engaged two
trustworthy man in yarkand one Muhammad
Shah was a grey bear 255 he was
accustomed to looking after camels and
was the only person who could go near
the refectory naar without being bitten
although he had left wife and children
behind in yarkand the desert had no
terrors for him he was a capital fellow
as honest as the day I could see him now
as plainly as though it were only
yesterday we parted his philosophic
serenity never deserted him when the
clouds of misfortune gathered thick
round our ill-fated Caravan his good
humour never failed there was always a
smile on his face even when he lay in
the delirium of death a gleam of triumph
and serenity shone in his eyes and the
light of an inward peace spread over his
withered copper brown countenance the
second man was to help in the management
of the camels was Kasim a a native
of Aqsa but at the time an inhabitant of
yarkand 48 years of age unmarried and a
caravan leader by profession of medium
height and strongly built with a black
beard he was of a serious disposition
and never laughed though always friendly
and pleasant but he had very often to be
reminded of his duties we wanted yet
another man he was of the same age as
Mohammad Shah and every spring for six
years past had gone attend to 14 days
journey into the desert and quest of
gold taking his food on the back of an
ass but not venturing further than then
he was able to get water by digging a
few years previously he had fled to mare
cat and now left wife and grown-up
children there behind him his subsequent
fate was in part of his own causing he
was brutal and of a violent temper and
the other men whom he attempted to
tyrannize over soon came to hate him he
conceived that his experience of the
desert warranted him in assuming a
domineering tone and he entertained in a
special grudge against Islam by because
Islam was appointed Caravan boshy or
Caravan leader and the other three men
were bidden to obey him some of the
inhabitants of Marrakech warned us
against this man telling us that he had
been more than once punished for theft
but the warning came too late when I
engaged
I thought we had lighted upon a treasure
trove for he was the only man in place
who knew anything of the desert our
menagerie of livestock also embraced
three sheep which we intended to kill
one after the other half the score of
hands and a which woke us up in the
morning
these last travelled in a basket perched
on the top of a camel's load of baggage
the first few days the hens laid two or
three eggs but as soon as the water
began to fail they stopped laying the
was an eccentric animal he
entertained a rooted objection to riding
on a camel's back every now and again he
used to wriggle through the covering of
the basket and after balancing himself
awhile on his elevated perch flew down
to the ground with a noisy cackle every
time we pitched camp the poultry were
let out for a run they imparted a little
life to the otherwise desolate
surroundings and a few handfuls of corn
were thrown down amongst the sand to
keep them employed and in motion on
April 9th
we made our final preparations we packed
the two or three bags of bread which
have been ordered beforehand and filled
the four iron tanks with fresh water
from the river
they held seventeen and a half 19 19 and
27 gallons respectively add to this
seventeen and a half gallons and a
goatskin
and we get a total of 100 gallons ample
sufficient for a 25 day's march the
tanks which were oblong in shape were
specially made for conveying honey from
India to yarkand being surrounded by a
wooden grating to protect the thin iron
plates against damage from knocks grass
and reeds were packed in between the
tank and the grating to prevent the
sun's rays from beating directly upon
the iron I reasoned if from air cat we
stared our course eastwards or rather
towards the east-northeast we were bound
sooner or later to come in contact with
the moss our tag and like the natives I
was convinced that we should find a lee
side to the range where the drifts and
would not be blown together but we
should be able to make long easy days
marches on firm ground and possibly
might even discover spring
and vegetation and perchance light upon
traces of an ancient civilization on the
maps which I had at hand the distance
through the desert as the crow flies
measured a hundred and eighty miles and
if we did only twelve miles a day the
entire journey ought not take us more
than fifteen days our supply of water
was therefore by every calculation more
than sufficient I was quite satisfied
with my estimate and thought we had an
easy task before us as an actual fact
the journey took 26 days are nearly
twice as long as I anticipated
April 10th long before sunrise the
courtyard was all alive our various
boxes bales and other impedimenta were
carried out and waves so that the camels
burdens might be suitably adjusted and
the several packages properly wrote
these preliminaries over they were
placed along the ground two-by-two at
such distances apart that a camel would
just get between them and be made to
kneel down whilst his load was fastened
to his pack saddle as he got up on his
feet a big rope was lashed crisscross
right round the hole and fastened to the
horizontal bars in the framework of the
pack saddle we took with us an extensive
equipment provisions for several months
particularly rice and bread preserved
foods sugar tea vegetables flour and so
forth in addition we had a large supply
of winter clothing felts and carpets for
after leaving the Houghton Darya I
intended to make for Tibet then I had my
scientific instruments photographic
apparatus with clothes upon a thousand
plates some books a year's issue of a
Swedish Journal of which I proposed
reading one number every evening a
cooking stove metal utensils crockery
three rifles six revolvers a supply of
ammunition packed into heavy boxes
together with a multitude of other
things add to all this water supplies
for 25 days and it will be clear that
each camel had a pretty heavy load to
carry whilst the animals were being
loaded I measured my first Bay
line of 400 meters close upon a quarter
of a mile Bogra walked it in five and a
half minutes this was a daily recurring
task for the contours of the ground
varied a good deal and the depth of the
sand made a very appreciable difference
in the time the camels took to do the
same distance the 10th of April 1895 was
a great day in the annals of mare cut
the courtyard every alley every house
roof in the neighborhood was crowded
with people all anxious to see us off
they will never come back again
never we heard them cry to one another
the camels are too heavily laid in they
will never get through the deep sand
these croakings did not disturb me in
the least the ground burned under my
feet to get off and we had an antidote
to the ill omen prophecies in the action
of the Hindus who just as I put my camel
in motion flung a few handfuls of da
tien Chinese bronze money with a square
hole in the middle over my head crying
good luck go with you
the camels were tied together in two
strings of four each a piece of stick
was thrust through the cartilage of the
animals nose a rope fastened to one end
of the stick was loosely nodded to the
tail of the camel in front in such wise
that if the second camel fell the knot
would come undone of itself the other
end of the piece of stick terminated in
a knob which prevented it from slipping
out of the animals nose I gave my
attention holy and undivided to my
compass and watched by which I steered
our course and measured the length of
our day's march and to the observation
of the country we were traveling through
Islam by had shown much ingenuity and
arranging my load for me it consisted of
the two boxes which held my most
delicate instruments and such things as
I generally needed when we and camped
for the night on the top of the boxes
and between the camels hump he spread
pelts carpets and cushions so that with
one leg on each side of the front hum I
rode as comfortably as though I were
sitting in an easy chair when all was
quite ready and I said goodbye to Nia's
beg whom I
awarded handsomely as well as to the
missionary Johannes and Hashim now when
he saw the caravan ready to start his
courage completely failed him and for
the second time he deserted me in the
moment when danger had really to be
faced and I despised the fellow
notwithstanding his pretended piety he
utterly lacked the courage which makes a
man place all his reliance upon God what
a strange contrast to Islam by the
the bow ideal of a good and
faithful servant who throughout the days
and months that followed never once
hesitated to follow his master no matter
where I went even when I rushed into
dangers which prudence should properly
have guarded me against spring had come
signs of the change manifested
themselves more and more every day the
temperature rose slowly but steadily the
minimum remaining permanently above
freezing point the Sun began to have
some power the spring breezes murmured
in our ears the fields were being sown
with corn the rice grounds put under
water the air was alive with the
flitting x' and buzzing of flies and
other insects it was this beautiful
Asiatic springtime all about us the
season of perennial hope that we set out
on our journey to the country where all
things are gripped in the deathly
embrace of a thousand years torpor where
every sand dune is a grave a country
whose climate is such that compared with
it the sternest winter would be a
smiling spring and through the narrow
lanes of the town crowded with people
strode the long string of camels holding
their heads high it was a solemn moment
every spectator was impressed a dead
silence reigned throughout the crowd
when my mind goes back to that moment I
am involuntarily reminded of a funeral
procession I can hear the dull
monotonous clanging of the caravan bells
still ringing in my ears and of a truth
their slow mournful Cadence's where the
virtual passing bell of most of us who
set forth on that eventful day for the
sand wastes of the terrible desert a
sad and peaceful grave amid the eternal
ocean of sand such was to be their
melancholy end the environments of town
were level the town itself scattered
amongst the old poplars fields groves
orchards and irrigation canals for half
an hour so we marched on quietly through
these pleasant surroundings then all of
a sudden there arose a fearful uproar
the two youngest camels being full of
spirit broke loose from their halters
shook off their loads and frisky as to
playful puppies began to race round the
fields till the dust rose and clouds
behind them one had been loaded with a
couple of water tanks upon being thrown
off one tank sprang a leak but luckily
near the top corner so that but little
real damage was done The Runaways were
soon caught and their burdens lashed on
again after that each was led separately
for we had plenty of help fully a
hundred mounted men accompanying us to
the outskirts of the village an hour
later two other camels broke loose
several things were chafed and bruised
and the ammunition box was trailed on
the ground Muhammad Shah said that
camels always get refractory after a
spell of rest they wanted to stretch
their limbs but after a few days steady
tramping would make them as quiet as
lambs after that as a precaution each
camel was led by a single man but even
then as so often happens during the
first day or two after starting on an
expedition
we have several unforeseen hindrances to
contend against for example the left
side of a camel's load would be heavier
than that on the right side and so had
to be adjusted or a bag of rice was on
the point of slipping off and had to be
tied faster and so on skirting the
desert
the second day's march passed off more
quietly and in a much more orderly
manner profiting from our first day's
experiences we weighed and distributed
the packages more successfully and
loaded our most precious possessions the
first amongst them the water on the
quietest camels I myself said perched at
pretty good height above the ground and
had a splendid view in every direction
at first the motion made me feel
somewhat giddy but I soon became
accustomed to the monotonous and
unceasingly jolting backwards and
forwards combined with the peculiar
swaying motion from side to side and
suffered no ill effects from it
whatsoever but I can readily believe it
would be very disagreeable to anyone
subject to seasickness having left
behind us the last house and field
belonging to mer ket we struck into a
level step where thickets and tangled
bushes grew pretty well everywhere and
they were even clumps of poplars in a
few places the wind blew and gusts from
the west northwest and grayish yellow
sand spouts drifted eastwards had a
great altitude their upper end slightly
bent over in the direction of the wind
the surface of the ground was partly
covered with fine soft dust partly with
deposits of salt but we soon passed into
a region of nothing but sand blown up
into small low dunes or ridges however
it proved to be only a narrow belt for
on the other side we once more came upon
plenteous plant life chiefly reads and
poplars and they're on the brink of the
ravine we pitched our camp for the night
half an hour later the loads were all
off the camels and the animals
themselves were tied together in a ring
to prevent them from lying down and
getting stiff legs after standing a
couple of hours they were let loose to
browse upon the thickets of reeds our
camp with its many packages and animals
made a very picturesque appearance and
it gave me a feeling of deep
satisfaction to think that all those
things were mine my tent a neat Indian
officers tent which mr. McCartney had
given me was pitched underneath a poplar
tree within it young lieutenant Davison
had died during his journey across the
pond there's two kashgar but it had been
well disinfected and I was not
superstitious the ground inside was
covered with a variegated carpet and all
round its sides were ranged my box
instrument cases photographic camera and
my plain simple bedstead the other boxes
and packages together with the water
tanks were left outside in the open air
my men kindled a fire and crouched round
it to prepare dinner rice pudding and
eggs for these last we had brought a
good supply the sheep were turned out to
graze and the poultry made themselves
quite at home amongst the scraps from
the cooking pod the dogs having
swallowed the pieces of meat that were
thrown to them began to chase one
another over the sand dunes in a word we
made quite a rural picture as soon as
the camp was settled my first care was
to examine the ravine which had stopped
us it ran from north to south and had
undoubtedly been formed by a branch of
the Tish knobbed area but was now dry it
was 20 feet wide and five feet deep and
when I bade the men dig a hole in the
bottom the water began to trickle up as
soon as they got three feet six inches
down the temperature of the water was
forty nine point eight degrees
Fahrenheit
whilst at of the air at the same time
viz two o'clock in the afternoon was
seventy six point six degrees Fahrenheit
although tasting bitter and nauseous
it was greedily drunk by both dogs and
sheep the camels were not allowed any
water until nearly an hour before the
start next morning from the very outset
we were obliged to exercise the most
rigid economy with our supplies of fresh
water and therefore used the water from
the ravine for boiling our eggs in for
washing the dishes and for personal
evolutions Mohammad Jakob who had
followed us all the way to the camp
brought us the very welcome present of a
couple of copper vessels filled with
fresh river water so that every member
of the caravan was able to quench his
thirst to the full without our having to
open the water tanks it had been a warm
day but no sooner did the Sun set then
we felt it cool and put on our extra
coats in the evening it was a dead calm
the tent flat was thrown back but the
flame from the candle never quivered our
desert man gave us a taste of his
knowledge he advised us first to keep
for some days to the right bank of the
archon Dario
till we came to a mountain called Chuck
Mach and to a large lake which was
connected with a river that flowed to
the north to reach that place would take
us eighteen days and from there one day
more would bring us to the Masai tog the
loftiest mountain in all that region
from the Mazar tog to the coat and Aria
on the east was no great distance north
of Mount Chuck Mac there was a track
which the gold-seekers were accustomed
to use and which led to a signpost
beyond that mark the desert was known by
the name of Kirk Kish Locke or the forty
towns because of the numerous ruins of
ancient cities which had contained April
11th after a quiet and refreshing
night's sleep I awoke before sunrise and
found the weather the reverse of
agreeable of violent nor'easter whistled
through the camp and the air was thick
with dust so they had except in the
immediate vicinity of the tent the whole
landscape was shrouded in a uniform grey
haze unloading the baggage and putting
up the tent took next to no time at all
but to get everything loaded up again
and all started required a good two
hours although that included the
preparations for breakfast the camels
objected to be loaded but afterwards
during the remainder of the march
behaved very well all vegetation
gradually ceased and we lost ourselves
in a labyrinth of sand dunes fifteen to
twenty feet high and of irregular
formation though they had for the most
part a north-south strike we tried to
skirt round them as much as possible
still there were a few difficult ridges
which we were compelled to go over and
one or other of these the camels which
carry the water fell luckily it was only
the four legs which gave way in each
case but we could not get the animals up
until after we had taken off their loads
and then we had to pack them on again
the camels were very clever at sliding
down the sandy slopes making use of
their hind legs as a brake and doing so
in the middle of the day we got
entangled in sand dunes so high that we
were obliged to make a long detour to
the north to get out of
the old she asserted that it was no use
going east for we should only be forced
to turn back there being nothing in that
direction but big sand our route that
day was a sinuous line along the edge of
the big sand the dunes dropped again to
only ten feet in height and occasionally
we traveled over soft dust with a
tolerably level surface and not a few
times we rode into a kind of cul-de-sac
between the horns of the crescent-shaped
dunes and were compelled to turn back
every now and again we passed a few
solitary poplars and shriveled reeds at
which the camel snatched as they rolled
on past them the nor'easter blew all day
long the sky was clouded in gray and it
was raw and cold we halted at dusk
after doing about 13 and a quarter miles
pitched our camp on the top of a hard
level dune where we had comfortably dry
ground under our feet close by were some
withered poplars from which we obtained
fuel for our fire and clumps of reeds
which furnished fodder for the camels
these last were warm after their long
and were led about for a time to
cool to prevent them from taking cold we
found a spot between two sand dunes
where the sand was already damn there we
dug our well and came upon water at a
depth of two and a half feet its
temperature was forty nine point one
degrees Fahrenheit and it had the same
brackish flavor as the water in the
ravine the day before April 12th we
travelled nearly fifteen miles still
along the edge of the great sandy desert
which sent out promontory to the north
several of these we were obliged to
cross over in other respects barren
desert alternated with narrow belts of
step upon which grew scanty tussocks of
grass withered and hard as glass and
which snapped off at a crackling sound
at the least touch the easiest ground to
travel over was firm level sand but
several places the earth was covered
with a coating of dust in which every
foot mark of the flat-footed camels was
sharply outlined
the dust was a soft as wool and in two
or three places so deep that the animals
dropped in it up to their knees
sometimes a thin crust of salt which
crunched under the camels hooves was
spread over the horizontal portions of
the sand solemnly and slowly the
ungainly beasts strode on one after the
other stretching down their long necks
to pluck the tussocks of grass which
grew within their reach as though they
had premonition of the hard times in
store for them at camp number three two
of the men as usual dug a well but could
not get down lower than six feet still
there was no water we then left the well
to itself for a couple of hours and the
water percolated through and gathered in
a little pool at the bottom of the hall
the dogs and poultry were always deeply
interested spectators of the digging
they knew perfectly well what it was for
and were always fearfully thirsty so far
all was going well
our precious stores were as yet
untouched the stock of camels province
was likewise undiminished the animals
having to content themselves with reeds
and brackish water the dogs were fed on
bread the poultry on corn and eggshells
the first day the hens laid three eggs
the second day two the third one however
we had a good supply without that packed
away in chaff in a basket April 13th
by the morning there were seven inches
of water in the bottom of the well all
day long during a march of 12 and
three-quarter miles we travelled
continuously amongst the sand dunes they
were all crescent-shaped with their
convex sides towards the east and the
horns or wings and the steeper face
looking towards the west or southwest
proving that at that season of the year
the prevailing winds blew from the east
and northeast poplar trees were common
everywhere throughout the day's march on
some of them the leaf buds were already
beginning to burst and the fresh green
Tufts made the camels mouths water in
most cases the dunes seemed to shun the
poplars but formed a circular wall
around them leaving the trees in the
middle of the hollow there too
finding shelter from the wind dried
branches and withered leaves lay in
little heaps it was a warm day the dogs
hunted vainly for water eagerly running
towards every little depression which
looked at all like the places in which
we dug our desert wells for lack of
better protection from the Sun they lay
down in the shade every poplar we passed
having first scratched away the top
layer of hot sand till they came to the
stratum that still retains some of the
coolness of the night Islam by Road on
the first camel which was also led by
Ulchi our guide but as Islam commanded
the better view he often corrected yochi
and suggested taking other directions
that gave umbrage to the ill-natured
desert man so that two or three times he
flung down the Rope threw himself on the
sand and challenged Islam to guide the
caravan himself when we came to camp a
violent quarrel broke out between the
two men y'all she came to my tent and
said that if he was to be interfered
with by Islam he had better go back and
he also accused Islam of being close
fisted with the bread he was
considerably taken aback when I quietly
remarked yes he had better go back but
added that before he did so he must
repay me the 22 shillings and sixpence
which he had received in advanced as his
first month's wages that brought him to
his senses
and in the most earnest tones he begged
to be allowed to remain with me I
allowed him to do so but on a distinct
understanding that henceforward he was
to obey Islam I had my misgivings
however that when we came face to face
the loneliness and monotony of life in
the desert the differences between the
two men would break out again but there
were no more quarrels
although y'all Chi nourished a growing
spite against Islam he wisely held his
tongue he always kept himself to himself
never talked to the other man and slept
apart a little distance from the rest
nor did he ever go near the camp fighter
until after Islam and his comrades had
gone to bed were they right I wonder and
suggesting that y'all she purposely led
us in the wrong direction if so he paid
the penalty for he died of thirst in the
desert at the depth of 3 and 3/4 feet we
came upon water with a temperature of 50
point 7 degrees Fahrenheit the dogs were
so thirsty that they tried to fling
themselves into the hole and we were
obliged to tie them up to prevent them
from doing so on April 14th Easter day
we only traveled 11 and a half miles in
one place the dunes on their sheltered
side were a steel gray color upon
examination I found that they were
coated with a thin crust of mica I also
made the discovery that the green
poplars only grew amongst the dunes
where the dunes came to an end there the
poplar ceased also possibly the trees
are their roots help in the formation of
the dunes we then came to a belt of
desert absolutely barren the ground
being a hard level plane of a variety of
brown colors crossed by low dunes of
yellow sand that looked like logs of
wood lying on the earth many small
pebbles were scattered over the plain
during this day's march we came across
the first traces of the wild camel at
least yochi said it was a wild camel but
I was not at all sure of it further on
the camel tracks became numerous but on
the other side of the but on the other
side of the argument it was not very
likely that tame camels would have run
away into the desert by themselves we
also observed the droppings and foot
marks of horses and yochi swore that the
wild horse ranged that part of the
desert on the top of one of these dunes
I halted a moment in order to observe
through my field glass a troop of
animals grazing on a bed of reeds a long
way off towards the north but before I
could make out whether they were horses
or antelopes they disappeared going off
northwards the dry grey clay was built
up into small terraces and ridges so
strangely like the grey clay houses in
the towns that I could not rest until I
went and examined them at close quarters
that day the dogs were very restless and
several times went off a long way from
the caravan once they were absent a
quarter of an hour and when they came
back they were wet underneath evidently
they had discovered water
we're after going about 11 and a half
miles we stumbled by chance upon a pool
i bade Kaseem try what it tasted like
sweet as honey he replied after
swallowing a good mouthful the
consequence was that we pitched the tent
and made our camp by the side of the
pool men dogs sheep poultry all hastened
to quench their thirst and as the day
had been hot we were all properly
thirsty the water was as clear as
crystal and perfectly sweet and bubbled
up out of a spring afterwards running
into a hollow of the ground some 80 or
90 yards long by about four yards wide
so that the water stood at about the
same general level below the surface
that it did in the wells we had dug all
the same it was not more than four feet
down the temperature was seventy one
point four degrees Fahrenheit at five
o'clock in the afternoon at the same
hour the temperature of the air was
seventy seven point nine degrees
Fahrenheit water spiders and beetles
were very numerous the ladder hummed
about over the plane and off went the
hens and chase of them the first of the
sheep was slaughtered here with the
usual ceremonies and the dogs got a good
meal out of the blood and awful in a
word considering it was the desert the
place was quite idyllic the Sun
disappeared from sight and the dust haze
whilst still 20 degrees above the
horizon thereupon the heat decreased
with marvelous rapidity by 9 o'clock at
night
the temperature of the spring water had
fallen to 59 point four degrees
Fahrenheit
proving that its temperature varied
directly with the temperature of the air
this pleasant camping ground tempted us
to give up a day to rest which was
equally welcome to us human beings as to
the animals we all enjoyed a good long
sleep and spent the next day and putting
several things in order the water tanks
were filled up clothes were washed
saddles and straps mended the day turned
out hot the sand becoming heated to a
hundred and twelve point three degrees
Fahrenheit but two or three whirlwinds
came up out of the north-northeast and
cooled the air splendidly whilst without
any reproach of conscience we could
drink as much water
as we ever liked Pez for the camels and
dogs they drank so much that you could
actually see their skin swelling out the
rest also suited the hens they managed
to lay four eggs during the night the
dogs barked incessantly and kept running
back along the route by which we had
come and on which we had seen the tracks
of the wild camels no doubt the denizens
of the desert were accustomed to
frequent the springs during the night
but finding us in possession of the
place they kept themselves at a safe
distance for that night on April 16th we
did 16 and three-quarter miles through a
country where sand dunes 15 or 16 feet
high alternated with steps of withered
Reed's which crunched under the camels
feet and sent up clouds of dust when
trodden upon tamarisks and poplars
occurred and sporadic clumps
we passed two pools of water like the
one we had left in the morning
all three lay along the same line
stretching east northeast in all
probability they mark the course of a
different affluent of the Archon Darya
we put out further and further into the
unknown ocean of sandy desert not a sign
of life to be seen not a sound to be
heard except the monotonous dingdong of
the bells tinkling in time to the soft
tramping of the camels every now and
again we made a short halt whenever in
fact we were at all uncertain of the
course we ought to stare opportunities
which the men seized upon to eat their
simple breakfast consisting of a few
handfuls of toasted flour steeped in
water which they sucked out of wooden
bowls the water and the tanks became
tepid during the course of the day for
my own part I always missed out
breakfast and contented myself with two
meals a day April 17th today there was a
fresh westerly breeze but the sky
remained perfectly clear on several
occasions I noticed that the dust storms
were only raised by the easterly and
northeasterly winds well no matter how
strongly a blue from the west the sky
always remained pure and clear before we
had gone very far we perceived in the
north a tolerably high mount like a
cloud or slight thickening of the
atmosphere fringe
the horizon hour after hour we rode
towards it but the mountain grew no
plainer to the eye nor did we seem to
approach any nearer to it the dunes
reach 16 feet in height and were often
very difficult to get over between them
the reed steps became more frequent and
the reeds ranker and growth a few hairs
left out from amongst them as the
caravan drew near this day too we passed
some small pools but they were
surrounded by say line in crustaceans
and the water in them was brackish away
towards the east-northeast a former
river had cut its sinuous way through
the desert the channel which was half
choked with sand and contained only a
few disconnected pools of water was 45
yards wide and six and a half feet deep
another riverbed quite dry was 22 yards
wide yo cheese explanation was as
follows the mountains we saw were the
southeastern continuation of the Maas
our tag stretching down to the right or
southern bank of the Yarkon Darya the
two dried up riverbeds had been
affluence of the archon Darya which used
to receive a portion of their waters
during the height of the summer the
clouds we saw in the north where columns
of steam or evaporation from the Yarkon
Darya reflected upon the pure blue sky
in all these explanations he was
unquestionably right at a later period I
was able to test two or three of his
statements and found things to be
exactly as he said for a whole hour
we traveled between two parallel riches
of sand which stretched north by 15
degrees east the one on our right was
more than 30 feet high and both had
rounded outlines the level step between
them was overgrown with exuberant
thistles and poplars we crossed the
ridge on our right and then passed along
a second Valley running parallel to the
first at the end of seventeen and a half
miles we pitched camp number seven under
the shade of a couple of leafy poplars
we had no need to dig for water
there were several indications that a
lake or running stream could not be far
off north of us was a thick forest of
poplars mosquitoes
eyes and moths were abundant at night
the last-mentioned
fluttered round my candle and hundreds
okay we'll put the bookmark in here next
episode we'll pick up where we left off
and get to the part where things take a
disastrous turn and men and animals
start perishing in a hot desert please
consider coming back from more Sven
Hadean in the Taklamakan desert until
then this is your host and friendly
narrator Lazlo Montgomery signing off
from the low desert of Southern
California not too distant from the
Mojave I'm not planning any Savannah
Dean type expeditions in the near or
distant future though I may take a ride
to Death Valley before the summer hits
we'll see see you next time everybody